# L003 Integer (int2, int4) Out-of-range Risks in PKs #

## Observations ##
Data collected: 2019-06-29 08:07:26 +0000 UTC  
Current database: dbname  



### Master (`runner-fa6cab46-project-9951336-concurrent-0`) ###
| Table | PK | Type | Current max value | &#9660;&nbsp;Capacity used, % |
|------|----|------|-------------------|-------------------------------|
|`test_schema.orders` | `id` | int4 |800,000,000 | 37.25|
|`test_schema."orders_A"` | `id` | int4 |300,000,000 | 13.97|


## Conclusions ##
  - [P1] High risks of out-of-range errors for integer columns. The columns listed below, being part of primary keys, have high risks to reach 100% of the integer capacity (2^31-1 = 2147483647 for `int4` columns, and 2^15-1 = 32767 for `int2` ones; see [the documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/datatype-numeric.html). Once it happens, INSERTs of new rows will not be possible (unless they use some non-incremental values, such as negative values) and the fix will require long downtime. The list of such columns:  
    - `test_schema."orders_A"`: reached value 300000000, 14% of `int4` capacity;
    - `test_schema.orders`: reached value 800000000, 37% of `int4` capacity.
  
 


## Recommendations ##
  - [P1] High risks of out-of-range errors for integer columns. Consider using `int8` in all PK columns, always. To convert existing columns to `int8`, consider the following approaches:  
    1. Blocking `ALTER TABLE .. ALTER COLUMN`: a straightforward solution requiring downtime (maintenance window).  
    1. "New column": create a new column, update it in batches (lasting up not more than a few seconds, not to block other queries), and then switch to using it, redefining all the constraints. Notice, that to re-define a primary key constraint, `ALTER TABLE .. ALTER COLUMN .. SET NOT NULL` will be needed. It is a blocking operation, up to Postgres 12 (where it might be lightweight if a proper `CHECK` constraint is defined). Since Postgres 11, it is possible to use a trick: when adding a column, use `DEFAULT` with `NOT NULL`, it will be not a blocking operation. For Postgres versions, prior 11, a specific downtime (maintenance window) will be needed anyway.  
    1. "New table": create a new table with the same schema as the existing one, capture all ongoing changes to an additional "log" table, copy existing data from the old table to the new one, and switch. This method, as the previous one, is non-trivial and requires careful development and testing under load (consider using [Nancy](https://gitlab.com/postgres-ai/nancy) for database experiments developing this solution).
  
 

